---
title: Use of Hybrid Public-Key Encryption (HPKE) with CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE)
abbrev: COSE HPKE
docname: draft-ietf-cose-hpke-03
category: std

ipr: pre5378Trust200902
area: Security
workgroup: COSE
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
       ins: H. Tschofenig
       name: Hannes Tschofenig
       organization: 
       email: hannes.tschofenig@gmx.net

 -
      ins: B. Moran
      name: Brendan Moran
      organization: Arm Limited
      email: Brendan.Moran@arm.com


normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC8174:
  RFC9180:
  RFC9052:
  RFC9053:
  
informative:
  RFC8937:
  RFC2630:
  
--- abstract

This specification defines hybrid public-key encryption (HPKE) for use with 
CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE). HPKE offers a variant of
public-key encryption of arbitrary-sized plaintexts for a recipient public key.

HPKE works for any combination of an asymmetric key encapsulation mechanism (KEM),
key derivation function (KDF), and authenticated encryption with
additional data (AEAD) function. Authentication for HPKE in COSE is
provided by COSE-native security mechanisms.

This document defines the use of the HPKE base mode with COSE. Other modes are
supported by HPKE but not by this specification.

--- middle

#  Introduction

Hybrid public-key encryption (HPKE) {{RFC9180}} is a scheme that 
provides public key encryption of arbitrary-sized plaintexts given a 
recipient's public key. HPKE utilizes a non-interactive ephemeral-static 
Diffie-Hellman exchange to establish a shared secret. The motivation for
standardizing a public key encryption scheme is explained in the introduction
of {{RFC9180}}.

The HPKE specification defines several features for use with public key encryption
and a subset of those features is applied to COSE ({{RFC9052}}, {{RFC9053}}). Since COSE provides
constructs for authentication, those are not re-used from the HPKE specification.
This specification uses the "base" mode, as it is called in HPKE specification
language.

# Conventions and Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in BCP&nbsp;14 {{RFC2119}} {{RFC8174}}
when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

This specification uses the following abbreviations and terms:
- Content-encryption key (CEK), a term defined in CMS {{RFC2630}}.
- Hybrid Public Key Encryption (HPKE) is defined in {{RFC9180}}.
- pkR is the public key of the recipient, as defined in {{RFC9180}}.
- skR is the private key of the recipient, as defined in {{RFC9180}}.
- Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM), see {{RFC9180}}.
- Key Derivation Function (KDF), see {{RFC9180}}.
- Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD), see {{RFC9180}}.
- Additional Authenticated Data (AAD), see {{RFC9180}}.

# HPKE for COSE

## Overview

This specification supports two uses of HPKE in COSE, namely 

* HPKE in a single recipient setup.
  This use cases uses a one layer COSE structure. 
  {{one-layer}} provides the details.

* HPKE in a multiple recipient setup. 
  This use case requires a two layer COSE structure.  {{two-layer}} 
  provides the details. While it is possible to support the single 
  recipient use case with a two layer structure, the single 
  layer setup is more efficient.

HPKE in Base mode requires little information to be provided by
the sender, namely

* algorithm information (KEM, KDF, and AEAD identifiers),
* an encapsulated key generated by the sender, and
* an identifier of the static recipient key.

In the subsections below we explain how this information is carried
inside the COSE_Encrypt0 and the COSE_Encrypt for the one layer and the
two layer structure, respectively.

In both cases a new structure is used to convey information about the HPKE
sender, namely the HPKE sender information structure (HPKE_sender_info).

When the alg value is set to 'HPKE-v1-BASE', the HPKE_sender_info structure MUST
be present in the unprotected header parameter.
  
The CDDL grammar describing the HPKE_sender_info structure is:

~~~
   HPKE_sender_info = [
       kem_id : uint,         ; kem identifier
       kdf_id : uint,         ; kdf identifier
       aead_id : uint,        ; aead identifier
       enc : bstr,            ; encapsulated key
   ]
~~~

The fields have the following meaning:

~~~
   +---------+----------------+------------+-------------------+
   | Name    | CBOR Type      | Value      | Description       |
   |         |                | Registry   |                   |
   +---------+----------------+------------+-------------------+
   | kem_id  | uint           | HPKE       | Identifier for    |
   |         |                | KEM IDs    | the KEM           |
   |         |                | Registry   |                   |
   |         |                |            |                   |
   | kdf_id  | uint           | HPKE KDF   | Identifier for    |
   |         |                | IDs        | the KDF ID        |
   |         |                |            |                   |
   | aead_id | uint           | HPKE AEAD  | Identifier for    |
   |         |                | IDs        | the AEAD ID       |
   |         |                |            |                   |
   | enc     | bstr           |            | Encapsulated key  |
   |         |                |            | defined by HPKE   |
   +---------+----------------+------------+-------------------+
~~~
{: #table-hpke-sender title="HPKE_sender_info structure"}

  kem_id: This parameter is used to identify the KEM. The registry
          for KEM ids has been established with RFC 9180.

  kdf_id: This parameter contains the KDF identifier.
          The registry containing the KDF ids has been established
          with RFC 9180.

  aead_id: This parameter contains the AEAD identifier. The registry
           containing the AEAD ids has been established with RFC 9180.

  enc: This parameter contains the encapsulated key, which is output
       of the HPKE KEM.

### Single Recipient / One Layer Structure {#one-layer}

With the one layer structure the information carried inside the 
COSE_recipient structure is embedded inside the COSE_Encrypt0. 

HPKE is used to directly encrypt the plaintext. The resulting ciphertext
may be included in the COSE_Encrypt0 or may be detached. If a payload is
transported separately then it is called "detached content". A nil CBOR
object is placed in the location of the ciphertext. See Section 5
of {{RFC9052}} for a description of detached payloads.

The sender MUST set the alg parameter in the protected header, which
indicates the use of HPKE. 

The sender MUST place the HPKE_sender_info structure into the unprotected
header. Although the use of the kid parameter in COSE_Encrypt0 is
discouraged by RFC 9052, this specification allows profiles of this
specification to use the kid parameter (or other parameters) to
identify the static recipient public key used by the sender. If the
COSE_Encrypt0 contains the kid then the recipient may use it to
select the appropriate private key.

{{cddl-hpke-one-layer}} shows the COSE_Encrypt0 CDDL structure.

~~~
COSE_Encrypt0_Tagged = #6.16(COSE_Encrypt0)

; Layer 0
COSE_Encrypt0 = [
    Headers,
    ciphertext : bstr / nil,
]
~~~
{: #cddl-hpke-one-layer title="CDDL for HPKE-based COSE_Encrypt0 Structure"}

The COSE_Encrypt0 MAY be tagged or untagged.

An example is shown in {{one-layer-example}}.

### Multiple Recipients / Two Layer Structure {#two-layer}

With the two layer structure the HPKE information is conveyed in the COSE_recipient 
structure, i.e. one COSE_recipient structure per recipient.

In this approach the following layers are involved: 

- Layer 0 (corresponding to the COSE_Encrypt structure) contains the content (plaintext)
encrypted with the CEK. This ciphertext MAY be detached. If not detached, then
it is included in the COSE_Encrypt structure.

- Layer 1 (corresponding to a recipient structure) contains parameters needed for 
HPKE to generate a shared secret used to encrypt the CEK. This layer conveys the 
encrypted CEK in the encCEK structure. The protected header MUST contain the HPKE 
alg parameter and the unprotected header MUST contain the HPKE_sender_info structure.
The unprotected header MAY contain the kid parameter to identify the static recipient
public key the sender has been using with HPKE.

This two-layer structure is used to encrypt content that can also be shared with
multiple parties at the expense of a single additional encryption operation.
As stated above, the specification uses a CEK to encrypt the content at layer 0.
For example, the content encrypted at layer 0 may be a firmware image.  The
same encrypted firmware image may need to be sent to many recipients;
however, each recipient uses their own private key to obtain the CEK.

The COSE_recipient structure, shown in {{cddl-hpke}}, is repeated for each
recipient.

~~~
COSE_Encrypt_Tagged = #6.96(COSE_Encrypt)
 
/ Layer 0 /
COSE_Encrypt = [
  Headers,
  ciphertext : bstr / nil,
  recipients : + COSE_recipient
]

/ Layer 1 /
COSE_recipient = [
  protected   : bstr .cbor header_map,
  unprotected : header_map,
  encCEK      : bstr,
]

header_map = {
  Generic_Headers,
  * label => values,
}
~~~
{: #cddl-hpke title="CDDL for HPKE-based COSE_Encrypt Structure"}

The COSE_Encrypt MAY be tagged or untagged. 

An example is shown in {{two-layer-example}}.

# HPKE Encryption and Decryption

## HPKE Encryption with SealBase

The SealBase(pkR, info, aad, pt) function is used to encrypt a plaintext pt to
a recipient's public key (pkR).

Two cases of plaintext need to be distinguished:

- For use in COSE_Encrypt, the plaintext "pt" passed into  
SealBase is the CEK. The CEK is a random byte sequence of length 
appropriate for the encryption algorithm selected in layer 0. For 
example, AES-128-GCM requires a 16 byte key and the CEK would 
therefore be 16 bytes long. 

- In case of COSE_Encrypt0, the plaintext "pt" passed into 
SealBase is the content to be encrypted. Hence, there is no 
intermediate layer utilizing a CEK.

The "aad" and the "info" parameters are described in {{aad}} and {{info}}, 
respectively. 

If SealBase() is successful, it will output a ciphertext "ct" and an encapsulated
key "enc".

## HPKE Decryption with OpenBase

The recipient will use the OpenBase(enc, skR, info, aad, ct) function with the "enc" and
the "ct" parameters received from the sender. The "aad" and the "info" parameters are
assumed to be constructed from the context and described
in {{aad}} and {{info}}, respectively. 

The OpenBase function will, if successful, decrypt "ct". When decrypted, the result
will be either the CEK (when COSE_Encrypt is used), or the content (if 
COSE_Encrypt0 is used). The CEK is the symmetric key used to decrypt the ciphertext at 
layer 0.

## AAD Parameter {#aad}

HPKE requires an "aad" parameter to be provided to the SealBase and OpenBase functions.
Note that there are three types of additional authenticated data used by this specification:

- AAD provided to HPKE for COSE_Encrypt0.
- AAD provided to HPKE for COSE_Encrypt at the recipient layer.
- AAD provided to the AEAD cipher used for content encryption at layer 0 by COSE_Encrypt.

We describe the three variants in the subsections below.

### AAD provided to HPKE for COSE_Encrypt0

When COSE_Encrypt0 is used then there is no separate AEAD function at the content 
encryption layer provided by COSE natively and HPKE offers this functionality.

The "aad" parameter provided to the SealBase and OpenBase functions is constructed
as follows:

~~~
Enc_structure = [
    context : "Encrypt0",
    protected : empty_or_serialized_map,
    external_aad : bstr
]
~~~

The protected field in the Enc_structure contains the protected attributes 
from the COSE_Encrypt0 structure at layer 0, encoded in a bstr type.

The external_aad field in the Enc_structure contains the Externally Supplied
Data described in Section 4.3 and Section 5.3 in RFC 9052. If this field is
not supplied, it defaults to a zero-length byte string. 

### AAD provided to HPKE for COSE_Encrypt at the Recipient Layer

The AAD used at the recipient layer re-uses Enc_structure 
from {{RFC9052}} and populates it with the following content:

~~~
Enc_structure = [
    context : "Enc_Recipient",
    protected : empty_or_serialized_map,
    external_aad : bstr
]
~~~

The protected field in the Enc_structure contains the protected attributes 
from the COSE_recipient structure at layer 1, encoded in a bstr type.

The external_aad field in the Enc_structure contains the Externally Supplied
Data described in Section 4.3 and Section 5.3 in RFC 9052. In the COSE_Encrypt
case this AAD information is also input to the AAD at layer 0, if an AEAD
cipher is used at layer 0. If this field is not supplied, it defaults to a
zero-length byte string. 

### AAD provided to the AEAD cipher used for Content Encryption at Layer 0 by COSE_Encrypt

The construction of AAD is defined in Section 5.3 of {{RFC9052}} (see Enc_structure
structure).

## Info Parameter {#info}

The HPKE specification defines the "info" parameter as a context information
structure that is used to ensure that the derived keying material is "bound" to
the context of the transaction. 

This section provides a suggestion for constructing the info structure, when used with
SealBase() and OpenBase(). HPKE leaves the info parameter for these two functions as
optional. Application profiles of this specification MAY populate the fields of the 
COSE_KDF_Context structure or MAY use a different structure as input to the "info"
parameter. If no content for the "info" parameter is not supplied, it defaults to 
a zero-length byte string.

This specification re-uses the context information structure defined in
{{RFC9053}} as a foundation for the info structure. This payload becomes the content
of the info parameter for the HPKE functions, when utilized. For better readability of
this specification the COSE_KDF_Context structure is repeated in {{cddl-cose-kdf}}.

~~~
   PartyInfo = (
       identity : bstr / nil,
       nonce : bstr / int / nil,
       other : bstr / nil
   )

   COSE_KDF_Context = [
       AlgorithmID : int / tstr,
       PartyUInfo : [ PartyInfo ],
       PartyVInfo : [ PartyInfo ],
       SuppPubInfo : [
           keyDataLength : uint,
           protected : empty_or_serialized_map,
           ? other : bstr
       ],
       ? SuppPrivInfo : bstr
   ]
~~~
{: #cddl-cose-kdf title="COSE_KDF_Context Data Structure as 'info' Parameter for HPKE"}

# Examples

## Single Recipient / One Layer Example {#one-layer-example}

This example assumes that a sender wants to communicate an
encrypted payload to a single recipient in the most efficient way.

An example of the COSE_Encrypt0 structure using the HPKE scheme is
shown in {{hpke-example-one}}. Line breaks and comments have been inserted
for better readability. 

It uses the following algorithm combination: 
- KEM: DHKEM(P-256, HKDF-SHA256)
- KDF: HKDF-SHA256
- AEAD: AES-128-GCM 

~~~
// payload: "This is the content", aad: ""
// 
16([
    h'a10120',  // alg = HPKE-v1-BASE
    {
        4: h'3031', // kid
        -4: [       // HPKE_sender_info
            16,     // kem = DHKEM(P-256, HKDF-SHA256)
            1,      // kdf = HKDF-SHA256
            1,      // aead = AES-128-GCM
            h'048c6f75e463a773082f3cb0d3a701348a578c67
              80aba658646682a9af7291dfc277ec93c3d58707
              818286c1097825457338dc3dcaff367e2951342e
              9db30dc0e7',  // enc
        ],
    },
    / encrypted plaintext /
    h'ee22206308e478c279b94bb071f3a5fbbac412a6effe34195f7
      c4169d7d8e81666d8be13',
])
~~~
{: #hpke-example-one title="COSE_Encrypt0 Example for HPKE"}

## Multiple Recipients / Two Layer {#two-layer-example}

In this example we assume that a sender wants to transmit a
payload to two recipients using the two-layer structure.
Note that it is possible to send two single-layer payloads, 
although it will be less efficient.

An example of the COSE_Encrypt structure using the HPKE scheme is
shown in {{hpke-example-two}}. Line breaks and comments have been inserted
for better readability. 

It uses the following algorithm combination: 

- At layer 0 AES-128-GCM is used for encryption of the plaintext
  "This is the content.". In our example, the ciphertext is detached.
- At the recipient structure at layer 1, DHKEM(P-256, HKDF-SHA256)
  (as the KEM), with AES-128-GCM (as the AEAD) and HKDF-SHA256
  (as the KDF) is used.

The algorithm selection is based on the registry of the values offered
by the alg parameters (see {{IANA}}).

~~~
// plaintext: "This is the content.", aad: ""
96_0([
    h'a10101',  // alg = AES-128-GCM (1)
    {5: h'67303696a1cc2b6a64867096'},  // iv
    h'',        // detached ciphertext
    [
        [
            h'a10120',  // alg = HPKE-v1-BASE (-1 #TBD)
            {
                4: h'3031', // kid
                -4: [       // HPKE_sender_info
                    16,     // kem = DHKEM(P-256, HKDF-SHA256)
                    1,      // kdf = HKDF-SHA256
                    1,      // aead = AES-128-GCM
                    / enc output /
                    h'0421ccd1b00dd958d77e10399c
                         97530fcbb91a1dc71cb3bf41d9
                         9fd39f22918505c973816ecbca
                         6de507c4073d05cceff73e0d35
                         f60e2373e09a9433be9e95e53c',
                ],
            },
            // ciphertext containing encrypted CEK
            h'bb2f1433546c55fb38d6f23f5cd95e1d72eb4
              c129b99a165cd5a28bd75859c10939b7e4d',
        ],

        [
            h'a10120',  // alg = HPKE-v1-BASE (-1 #TBD)
            {
                4: h'313233', // kid
                -4: [       // HPKE_sender_info
                    16,     // kem = DHKEM(P-256, HKDF-SHA256)
                    1,      // kdf = HKDF-SHA256
                    1,      // aead = AES-128-GCM
                    / enc output /
                       h'6de507c4073d05cceff73e0d35
                         f60e2373e09a9433be9e95e53c
                         9fd39f22918505c973816ecbca
                         6de507c4073d05cceff73e0d35
                         f60e2373e09a9433be9e95e53c',
                ],
            },
            // ciphertext containing encrypted CEK
            h'c4169d7d8e81666d8be13bb2f1433546c55fb
              c129b99a165cd5a28bd75859c10939b7e4d',
        ]        
    ],
])
~~~
{: #hpke-example-two title="COSE_Encrypt Example for HPKE"}

To offer authentication of the sender the payload in {{hpke-example-two}}
is signed with a COSE_Sign1 wrapper, which is shown in {{hpke-example-sign}}.
The payload in {{hpke-example-sign}} corresponds to the content shown in
{{hpke-example-two}}.

~~~
18(
  [
    / protected / h'a10126' / {
            \ alg \ 1:-7 \ ECDSA 256 \
          } / ,
    / unprotected / {
          / kid / 4:'sender@example.com'
        },
    / payload /     h'AA19...B80C',
    / signature /   h'E3B8...25B8'
  ]
)
~~~
{: #hpke-example-sign title="COSE_Encrypt Example for HPKE"}


# Security Considerations {#sec-cons}

This specification is based on HPKE and the security considerations of HPKE
{{RFC9180}} are therefore applicable also to this specification.

HPKE assumes the sender is in possession of the public key of the recipient and
HPKE COSE makes the same assumptions. Hence, some form of public key distribution
mechanism is assumed to exist.

HPKE relies on a source of randomness to be available on the device. Additionally, 
with the two layer structure the CEK is randomly generated and the it MUST be
ensured that the guidelines for random number generations are followed. 

The COSE_Encrypt structure MUST be authenticated using COSE constructs like 
COSE_Sign, COSE_Sign1, COSE_MAC, or COSE_MAC0.

When COSE_Encrypt or COSE_Encrypt0 is used with a detached ciphertext then the
subsequently applied integrity protection via COSE_Sign, COSE_Sign1, COSE_MAC, 
or COSE_MAC0 does not cover this detached ciphertext. Implementers MUST ensure
that the detached ciphertext also experiences integrity protection. This is, for
example, the case when an AEAD cipher is used to produce the detached ciphertext
but may not be guaranteed by non-AEAD ciphers.

#  IANA Considerations {#IANA}

This document requests IANA to add new values to the 'COSE Algorithms' and to 
the 'COSE Header Algorithm Parameters' registries in the 'Standards Action 
With Expert Review category.

## COSE Algorithms Registry

-  Name: HPKE-v1-BASE
-  Value: TBD1 (Assumed: -1)
-  Description: HPKE in version 1 in base mode for use with COSE
-  Capabilities: [kty]
-  Change Controller: IESG
-  Reference:  [[TBD: This RFC]]
-  Recommended: Yes

## COSE Header Algorithm Parameters

-  Name: HPKE_sender_info
-  Label: TBD2 (Assumed: -4)
-  Value type: HPKE_sender_info
-  Value Registry: N/A
-  Description: HPKE Sender Information structure for the Base mode.

--- back

# Contributors

We would like thank the following individuals for their contributions
to the design of embedding the HPKE output into the COSE structure 
following a long and lively mailing list discussion. 

- Daisuke Ajitomi
- Richard Barnes
- Ilari Liusvaara

Finally, we would like to thank Russ Housley for his contributions to
the draft as a co-author of initial versions.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to thank John Mattsson, Mike Prorock, Michael Richardson,
Goeran Selander, Laurence Lundblade and Orie Steele for their review feedback.
